README.md, before:

# rib

[![CRAN status](https://www.r-pkg.org/badges/version/rib?color=blue)](https://cran.r-project.org/package=rib)
![CRAN downloads](https://cranlogs.r-pkg.org/badges/grand-total/rib)

*An R implementation of Interactive Brokers API*

Originally inspired by [`IBrokers`](https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=IBrokers),
`rib` is a native [R](https://www.r-project.org/) client that implements
[Interactive Brokers](https://www.interactivebrokers.com/) API to communicate
with TWS or IBGateway.

It aims to be feature complete, however it does not support legacy versions.
Currently, only API versions `v187+` are supported.

The package design mirrors the official C++/Java
[IB API](https://interactivebrokers.github.io/tws-api/),
which is based on an asynchronous communication model over TCP.

## Installation
To install from [CRAN](https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=rib):
```R
install.packages("rib")
```

To install the latest snapshot from GitHub, assuming
[`devtools`](https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=devtools) or at least
[`remotes`](https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=remotes) is already installed:
```R
remotes::install_github("lbilli/rib")
```

## Usage
The user interacts mainly with two classes, implemented as
[`R6`](https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=R6) objects:
- `IBClient`: responsible to establish a connection and send requests to the server
- `IBWrap`: base class holding the callbacks that are invoked when responses
  are processed. User customizations are derived from this class.

Other data structures, such as `Contract` and `Order`, are implemented as R lists,
or nested lists, and mirror the respective classes in the official IB API.

A complete minimal working example is shown.
For this code to work, an instance of IB TWS or IBGateway needs to be running
on the local machine and listening on port `4002`.
**Note:** _demo_ or _paper_ account recommended!! :smirk:
```R
library(rib)

# Define a customized callbacks wrapper
IBWrapCustom <- R6::R6Class("IBWrapCustom",
  class=      FALSE,
  cloneable=  FALSE,
  lock_class= TRUE,

  inherit= IBWrap,

  public= list(
    # Customized methods go here
    error=            function(id, errorTime, errorCode, errorString, advancedOrderRejectJson)
                        cat("Error:", id, errorTime, errorCode, errorString, advancedOrderRejectJson, "\n"),

    nextValidId=      function(orderId)
                        cat("Next OrderId:", orderId, "\n"),

    managedAccounts=  function(accountsList)
                        cat("Managed Accounts:", accountsList, "\n")

    # more method overrides can go here...
  )
)

# Instantiate wrapper and client
wrap <- IBWrapCustom$new()
ic   <- IBClient$new()

# Connect to the server with clientId = 1
ic$connect(port=4002, clientId=1)

# Check connection messages (optional)
ic$checkMsg(wrap)

# Define contract
contract <- IBContract(symbol="GOOG", secType="STK", exchange="SMART", currency="USD")

# Define order
order <- IBOrder(action="BUY", totalQuantity=10, orderType="LMT", lmtPrice=100)

orderId <- 1    # Should match whatever is returned by the server

# Send order
ic$placeOrder(orderId, contract, order)

# Check inbound messages
ic$checkMsg(wrap)

# Disconnect
ic$disconnect()
```

As R is single threaded, in general it is the user's responsibility to code
some kind of event loop to periodically process incoming messages:
_i.e._ there is no background `Reader` monitoring the connection
and processing the server responses.

Two possible approaches, with or without a loop, are described:

#### Straight Request-Response pattern. No loop.
This is the simplest case. It's not suitable for data subscriptions or whenever a
stream of messages is expected. It follows the pattern:
- connect
- send requests
- process responses
- disconnect

```R
library(rib)

# Instantiate wrapper, client and connect
wrap <- IBWrapSimple$new()
ic   <- IBClient$new()
ic$connect(port=4002, clientId=1)

# Send requests, e.g.:
contract <- IBContract(symbol="GOOG", secType="STK", exchange="SMART", currency="USD")
ic$reqContractDetails(11, contract)

# more requests can go here...

# Parse responses
# Might need to be called several times to exhaust all messages
ic$checkMsg(wrap)

# Find results in
wrap$context

# Disconnect
ic$disconnect()
```

#### Request-Response loop
A more realistic application requires a loop around the previous example:
- connect
- repeat
  - send requests
  - process responses
  - if done exit
- disconnect

```R
library(rib)

# Instantiate wrapper, client and connect
wrap <- IBWrapSimple$new()
ic   <- IBClient$new()
ic$connect(port=4002, clientId=1)

# Main loop
repeat {

  # Application logic goes here
  # e.g.: send request
  ic$reqContractDetails(...)

  # Wait and process responses
  ic$checkMsg(wrap)

  if(done)
    break

  # Might be convenient to have a little wait here
  Sys.sleep(1)
}

# Disconnect
ic$disconnect()
```

## Implementation Details

#### [`IBClient`](R/IBClient.R)
This implements the IB `EClient` class functionality. Among its methods:
- `new()`: create a new instance.
- `connect(host, port, clientId, connectOptions)`: establish a connection.
- `disconnect()`: terminate the connection.
- `checkMsg(wrap, timeout)`: wait for responses and dispatch callbacks defined
  in `wrap`, which must be an instance of a class derived from `IBWrap`.
  If no response is available, it **blocks** up to `timeout` seconds.
  If `wrap` is missing, messages are taken off the wire and discarded.
  Return the number of responses processed. **Needs to be called regularly!**
- methods that send requests to the server.
  Refer to the official IB `EClient` class documentation for further details and
  method signatures.

#### [`IBWrap`](R/IBWrap.R)
Like the official IB `EWrapper` class, this holds the callbacks that are dispatched
when responses are processed. `IBWrap` itself contains only stubs.
Users need to derive from it and override the desired methods.
The code [above](#usage) provides a template of the procedure.

For a more extensive example refer to the definition of
[`IBWrapSimple`](examples/IBWrapSimple.R), mainly provided for
illustrative purposes, which simply prints out the content of the responses
or store it within `IBWrapSimple$context` for later inspection.

For more details about callback definitions and signatures,
refer to the official IB `EWrapper` class documentation.

## Notes
Callbacks are generally invoked with arguments and types matching the signatures
as described in the official documentation.
However, there are few exceptions:
- `tickPrice()` has an extra `size` argument,
  which is meaningful only when `TickType ∈ {BID, ASK, LAST}`.
  In these cases, the official IB API fires an extra `tickSize()` event instead.
- `historicalData()` is invoked only once per request,
  presenting all the historical data as a single `data.frame`,
  whereas the official IB API invokes it row-by-row.
- `scannerData()` is also invoked once per request and its arguments
  are in fact vectors rather than single values.

These modifications make it possible to establish the rule:
_one callback per server response_.

Consequently, ~~`historicalDataEnd()`~~
(starting from `v196` it's sent in a separate message)
and `scannerDataEnd()` are redundant and are **not** used in this package.

`data.frame` are passed to several other callbacks, such as:
`softDollarTiers()`, `familyCodes()`, `mktDepthExchanges()`,
`smartComponents()`, `newsProviders()`, `histogramData()`,
`marketRule()` and the `historicalTicks*()` family.

#### Missing Values
Occasionally, for numerical types, there is the need to represent
the lack of a value.

IB API does not have a uniform solution across the board, but rather
it adopts a variety of sentinel values.
They can be either the plain `0` or the largest representable value
of a given type such as `2147483647` and `9223372036854775807`
for 32- and 64-bit integers respectively or `1.7976931348623157E308`
for 64-bit floating point.

This package makes an effort to use R built-in `NA`
in all circumstances.

#### Data Structures
Other classes that mainly hold data are also [replicated](R/structs.R).
They are implemented as R lists, possibly nested, with names, types and default values
matching the IB API counterparts: _e.g._
`Contract`, `Order`, `ComboLeg`, `ExecutionFilter`, `ScannerSubscription`
and `Condition`.

To use them, simply make a copy and override their elements:
```R
contract          <- Contract
contract$conId    <- 12345
contract$currency <- "USD"
```
In the case of `Contract` and `Order`, helper [functions](R/factory.R)
are also provided to simplify the assignment to a subset of the fields:
```R
contract <- IBContract(symbol="GOOG", secType="STK", exchange="SMART", currency="USD")

# Equivalent to
contract <- Contract
contract$symbol   <- "GOOG"
contract$secType  <- "STK"
contract$exchange <- "SMART"
contract$currency <- "USD"
```
and
```R
order <- IBOrder(action="BUY", totalQuantity=100, orderType="LMT", lmtPrice=110)

# Equivalent to
order <- Order
order$action        <- "BUY"
order$totalQuantity <- 100
order$orderType     <- "LMT"
order$lmtPrice      <- 110
```
To instantiate a `Condition`, invoke `fCondition(type)`
and fill in the appropriate fields:
```R
condition <- fCondition("Price")
condition$conId    <- 265598L
condition$exchange <- "SMART"
condition$is_more  <- TRUE
condition$value    <- 200
```
`TagValueList` are implemented as R named character vectors.
Wherever a `TagValueList` is needed, something like this can be used:
```R
tagvaluelist <- c(tag1="value1", tag2="value2")
# or, in case of an empty list:
emptylist <- character()
```

Commit message:

Update to API v215 Drop support for API < v213 and the legacy protocol

README.md, after:

# rib

[![CRAN status](https://www.r-pkg.org/badges/version/rib?color=blue)](https://cran.r-project.org/package=rib)
![CRAN downloads](https://cranlogs.r-pkg.org/badges/grand-total/rib)

*An R implementation of Interactive Brokers API*

Originally inspired by [`IBrokers`](https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=IBrokers),
`rib` is a native [R](https://www.r-project.org/) client that implements
[Interactive Brokers](https://www.interactivebrokers.com/) API to communicate
with TWS or IBGateway.

It aims to be feature complete, however it does not support legacy versions.

It is noteworthy to mention that the official IB API has recently adopted
Protocol Buffers as the underlying wire format, replacing the legacy custom protocol.
This package followed suit and support for the latter has been dropped.

Currently, only API versions `v213+` are supported, which translates to
TWS version `10.40` or later.

The package design mirrors the official C++/Java
[IB API](https://interactivebrokers.github.io/tws-api/),
which is based on an asynchronous communication model over TCP.

## Installation
To install from [CRAN](https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=rib):
```R
install.packages("rib")
```

To install the latest snapshot from GitHub, assuming
[`devtools`](https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=devtools) or at least
[`remotes`](https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=remotes) is already installed:
```R
remotes::install_github("lbilli/rib")
```

## Usage
The user interacts mainly with two classes, implemented as
[`R6`](https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=R6) objects:
- `IBClient`: responsible to establish a connection and send requests to the server
- `IBWrap`: base class holding the callbacks that are invoked when responses
  are processed. User customizations are derived from this class.

Other data structures, such as `Contract` and `Order`, are implemented as R lists,
or nested lists, and mirror the respective classes in the official IB API.

A complete minimal working example is shown.
For this code to work, an instance of IB TWS or IBGateway needs to be running
on the local machine and listening on port `4002`.
**Note:** _demo_ or _paper_ account recommended!! :smirk:
```R
library(rib)

# Define a customized callbacks wrapper
IBWrapCustom <- R6::R6Class("IBWrapCustom",
  class=      FALSE,
  cloneable=  FALSE,
  lock_class= TRUE,

  inherit= IBWrap,

  public= list(
    # Customized methods go here
    error=            function(id, errorTime, errorCode, errorString, advancedOrderRejectJson)
                        cat("Error:", id, errorTime, errorCode, errorString, advancedOrderRejectJson, "\n"),

    nextValidId=      function(orderId)
                        cat("Next OrderId:", orderId, "\n"),

    managedAccounts=  function(accountsList)
                        cat("Managed Accounts:", accountsList, "\n")

    # more method overrides can go here...
  )
)

# Instantiate wrapper and client
wrap <- IBWrapCustom$new()
ic   <- IBClient$new()

# Connect to the server with clientId = 1
ic$connect(port=4002, clientId=1)

# Check connection messages (optional)
ic$checkMsg(wrap)

# Define contract
contract <- IBContract(symbol="GOOG", secType="STK", exchange="SMART", currency="USD")

# Define order
order <- IBOrder(action="BUY", totalQuantity=10, orderType="LMT", lmtPrice=100)

orderId <- 1    # Should match whatever is returned by the server

# Send order
ic$placeOrder(orderId, contract, order)

# Check inbound messages
ic$checkMsg(wrap)

# Disconnect
ic$disconnect()
```

As R is single threaded, in general it is the user's responsibility to code
some kind of event loop to periodically process incoming messages:
_i.e._ there is no background `Reader` monitoring the connection
and processing the server responses.

Two possible approaches, with or without a loop, are described:

#### Straight Request-Response pattern. No loop.
This is the simplest case. It's not suitable for data subscriptions or whenever a
stream of messages is expected. It follows the pattern:
- connect
- send requests
- process responses
- disconnect

```R
library(rib)

# Instantiate wrapper, client and connect
wrap <- IBWrapSimple$new()
ic   <- IBClient$new()
ic$connect(port=4002, clientId=1)

# Send requests, e.g.:
contract <- IBContract(symbol="GOOG", secType="STK", exchange="SMART", currency="USD")
ic$reqContractDetails(11, contract)

# more requests can go here...

# Parse responses
# Might need to be called several times to exhaust all messages
ic$checkMsg(wrap)

# Find results in
wrap$context

# Disconnect
ic$disconnect()
```

#### Request-Response loop
A more realistic application requires a loop around the previous example:
- connect
- repeat
  - send requests
  - process responses
  - if done exit
- disconnect

```R
library(rib)

# Instantiate wrapper, client and connect
wrap <- IBWrapSimple$new()
ic   <- IBClient$new()
ic$connect(port=4002, clientId=1)

# Main loop
repeat {

  # Application logic goes here
  # e.g.: send request
  ic$reqContractDetails(...)

  # Wait and process responses
  ic$checkMsg(wrap)

  if(done)
    break

  # Might be convenient to have a little wait here
  Sys.sleep(1)
}

# Disconnect
ic$disconnect()
```

## Implementation Details

#### [`IBClient`](R/IBClient.R)
This implements the IB `EClient` class functionality. Among its methods:
- `new()`: create a new instance.
- `connect(host, port, clientId, connectOptions)`: establish a connection.
- `disconnect()`: terminate the connection.
- `checkMsg(wrap, timeout)`: wait for responses and dispatch callbacks defined
  in `wrap`, which must be an instance of a class derived from `IBWrap`.
  If no response is available, it **blocks** up to `timeout` seconds.
  If `wrap` is missing, messages are taken off the wire and discarded.
  Return the number of responses processed. **Needs to be called regularly!**
- methods that send requests to the server.
  Refer to the official IB `EClient` class documentation for further details and
  method signatures.

#### [`IBWrap`](R/IBWrap.R)
Like the official IB `EWrapper` class, this holds the callbacks that are dispatched
when responses are processed. `IBWrap` itself contains only stubs.
Users need to derive from it and override the desired methods.
The code [above](#usage) provides a template of the procedure.

For a more extensive example refer to the definition of
[`IBWrapSimple`](examples/IBWrapSimple.R), mainly provided for
illustrative purposes, which simply prints out the content of the responses
or store it within `IBWrapSimple$context` for later inspection.

For more details about callback definitions and signatures,
refer to the official IB `EWrapper` class documentation.

## Notes
Callbacks are generally invoked with arguments and types matching the signatures
as described in the official documentation.
However, there are few exceptions:
- `tickPrice()` has an extra `size` argument,
  which is meaningful only when `TickType ∈ {BID, ASK, LAST}`.
  In these cases, the official IB API fires an extra `tickSize()` event instead.
- `historicalData()` is invoked only once per request,
  presenting all the historical data as a list of rows,
  whereas the official IB API invokes it on a row-by-row basis.
- `scannerData()` is similarly invoked once per request with a list of rows
  as argument. Consequently, `scannerDataEnd()` is redundant and
  it is **not** used in this package.

These modifications make it possible to establish the rule:
_one callback per server response_.

Tabular data are generally structured as lists of rows.
This applies to several callbacks, such as:
`softDollarTiers()`, `familyCodes()`, `mktDepthExchanges()`,
`smartComponents()`, `newsProviders()`, `histogramData()`,
`marketRule()` and the `historicalTicks*()` family.

#### Missing Values
Occasionally, for numerical types, there is the need to represent
the lack of a value.

IB API does not have a uniform solution across the board, but rather
it adopts a variety of sentinel values.
They can be either the plain `0` or the largest representable value
of a given type such as `2147483647` and `9223372036854775807`
for 32- and 64-bit integers respectively or `1.7976931348623157E308`
for 64-bit floating point.

This package makes an effort to use R built-in `NA`
in all circumstances.

#### Data Structures
Other classes that mainly hold data are also [replicated](R/structs.R).
They are implemented as R lists, possibly nested, with names, types and default values
matching the IB API counterparts: _e.g._
`Contract`, `Order`, `ComboLeg`, `ExecutionFilter`, `ScannerSubscription`
and `Condition`.

To use them, simply make a copy and override their elements:
```R
contract          <- Contract
contract$conId    <- 12345
contract$currency <- "USD"
```
In the case of `Contract` and `Order`, helper [functions](R/factory.R)
are also provided to simplify the assignment to a subset of the fields:
```R
contract <- IBContract(symbol="GOOG", secType="STK", exchange="SMART", currency="USD")

# Equivalent to
contract <- Contract
contract$symbol   <- "GOOG"
contract$secType  <- "STK"
contract$exchange <- "SMART"
contract$currency <- "USD"
```
and
```R
order <- IBOrder(action="BUY", totalQuantity=100, orderType="LMT", lmtPrice=110)

# Equivalent to
order <- Order
order$action        <- "BUY"
order$totalQuantity <- 100
order$orderType     <- "LMT"
order$lmtPrice      <- 110
```
To instantiate a `Condition`, invoke `fCondition(type)`
and fill in the appropriate fields:
```R
condition <- fCondition("Price")
condition$conId    <- 265598L
condition$exchange <- "SMART"
condition$is_more  <- TRUE
condition$value    <- 200
```
`TagValueList` are implemented as R named character vectors.
Wherever a `TagValueList` is needed, something like this can be used:
```R
tagvaluelist <- c(tag1="value1", tag2="value2")
# or, in case of an empty list:
emptylist <- character()
```
